Personal identity is an new topic
for us. Let's just try and get
a handle on the question that
will be pursuing.
The broad idea is look what's
necessary for your personal
survival. Now you might say
something like I would say
chocolate. But of course we are
really thinking, in a course
called Mind and Reality, about
metaphysics, about what's
metaphysically necessary for
your survival. And although I
have a pretty serious chocolate
addiction, it's certainly not
metaphysically
necessary for my survival.
Now the other thing we want to
be careful about is that people
sometimes talk in a loose way
about persons. I might say to
you after undergoing some
experience, ‘I am a different
person now’. You might say ‘Steve,
let's go do that thing again
that we did before’ and I'm
saying ‘no, no, I won't do it.’
And you'll say ‘Steve look, you
did it before’. But I'm saying ‘no, I
won't do it. I'm a different
person now now.’ This is a Perfectly good
way of talking. No harm in it.
But it's not what we're thinking
about when we are thinking about
personal identity. I take it
that what you're saying is,
strictly speaking false. In
order to try to express
something true. If you say ‘I am
a different person now’,
you're stressing that its you
that is a different person now.
So you're sort of getting into
some kind of tangle. We
don't want to go there.
So here's a way of
formulating the question that
we're interested in when trying to
get the idea of what's
metaphysically necessary for
survival. This is due to David
Olson (we will be reading some
of some work). Olson says
here's the question.
If a person exists at one time
and something exists at another
time, under what possible
circumstances is it the case
that the person is the thing?
If person exists at one time and
something exists or another
time, under what possible
circumstances is it the case
that the person is the thing?
So here is Olson’s formulation
of a question about personal
identity.
Focus very carefully on this
formulation because it's
difficult to get a good handle
on the question. Now let's
start with some illustrations.
The first thing to note here is
that identifying a person is
often something that's very
easy. You and I are looking back
at some beautiful holiday
photos, and you might say
looking at the photo, that's me,
that's me. No problem at all
identifying people. If, for
example, yourself right, you're
a person. I'm a person, very
good, but there are cases in
which identifying people is very
difficult. I want to give you 2
of them and I want you to have a
think about these. Cases, and
ideally I want you to think
about them with another person
that you are sharing this
lecture watching with. You'll
also notice that after the
lecture there are some questions
to do with these two cases.
So I'm going to give you the
case and then you've got 90
seconds to think about the
answer. Here's the first one.
Oma suffers from a rare brain
distorting. Disease, his sister
Betty Office to know donate her
left Brain Hemisphere. She's got
two hemispheres right. She needs
one. I spoke. Omar's brain is
removed and Betty's hemisphere
is implanted in his skull.
The question is, does Omar
continue to exist? 90 seconds. Go!
Great, now this is the thing I
really miss most about the live
lectures. These 90 seconds and
then a bit of discussion I get
to find out what you're
thinking. I'm going to have to
read what you write later. Just
give me like a sentence to
sentence is 'cause I really need
that that connection anyway.
That was the first case. I'm
really curious what you thought.
Here's the second case. It's
kind of like the first, but
different. It's over again. He
suffers from a rare, but I can't
say that today, can I?
Oma suffers from a rare brain
destroying disease. His sister
Betty offers to have her brain
wiped and reprogrammed with
Omar's memories. Sure enough,
Betty's brain is wiped and
reprogrammed shortly after
that Omar's brain.
Gives out altogether they did it
just in time. Now, does Omar
continue to exist in this
scenario? Once again, I want
you to take 90 seconds. Have
a think I do we have a chat
with a friend. What do you
think? Yes or no? Go!
So if you've been following
along, you've now given us
answers to two questions,
perhaps based on discussion with
a friend who, if you're lucky,
might have some different views
about what the matter is.
So what have we done? You know
that our topic for personal
identity is about what's
metaphysically necessary for
survival as a person.
You also know the Olson provides
us with a good way of
formulating the questions. I
think that if there is a
question here that we can
address, it's the olsens
question. If a person exists at
a time and something exists to
another time, under what
possible circumstances is it the
case that the person is the
thing? There's the question
about personal identity. We've
also seen that there are going
to be some edge cases.
Where even establishing weather.
The thing is, the person or
not could be quite
challenging, so it looks on
the face of it as if there's
room for us as philosophers
to do some work here.